documents/TEST.md, before:

# Test 
Simple macro for unit testing.

# Usage

```lisp
(import "test")
```

# Specification

```lisp
($assert test-expression expected-value [pred-function])
```
Checks if the evaluated values of `test-expression` and `expected-value` are equal.
If they are not, an error message is printed.
An optional `pred-function` can be used to specify how to compare the values e.g. `eq`, `=`, `eql`, ...
The `equal` function is used for comparison by default.

```lisp
($test test-expression expected-value [pred-function])
```
Checks to see if the evaluated value of `test-expression` and the quoted value of `expected-value` are equal.
If the comparison fails, an error message is printed.
An optional `pred-function` can be used to specify how to compare the values e.g. `eq`, `=`, `eql`, ...
The `equal` function is used for comparison by default.



```lisp
($eval form)
```
Evaluate form. Ignore top level check. 

```lisp
($error form error-class)
```
Error check. Error class of form is error-class?

```lisp
($error1 form error-class)
```
Error check. Error class of form is error-class? Not ignore top-level check.

Commit message:

Added a new type of test for testing order of operations Refactored `bug.lsp` using this new test Added a new macro `push-end`

documents/TEST.md, after:

# Test 
Simple macro for unit testing.

# Usage

```lisp
(import "test")
```

# Specification

(**$assert** *test-expression* *expected-value* [*pred-function*])\
Checks if the evaluated values of `test-expression` and `expected-value` are equal.
If they are not, an error message is printed.
An optional `pred-function` can be used to specify how to compare the values e.g. `eq`, `=`, `eql`, ...
The `equal` function is used for comparison by default.

(**$test** *test-expression* <u>expected-value</u> [*pred-function*])\
Checks to see if the evaluated value of `test-expression` and the quoted value of `expected-value` are equal.
If the comparison fails, an error message is printed.
An optional `pred-function` can be used to specify how to compare the values e.g. `eq`, `=`, `eql`, ...
The `equal` function is used for comparison by default.

(**record-operation** *order-in-sequence*)\
Appends the given `order-in-sequence` value to the dynamic `*operation-sequence*` list, which serves as a record of the order in which operations occur.

(**$assert-ordered-operations** *expected-sequence* *body**)\
Evaluates the provided `body` forms, which may contain operation orders recorded by the `record-operation` function. After evaluating the `body` forms, it asserts that the recorded operations in the dynamic `*operation-sequence*` list match `expected-sequence`.

(**$eval** *form*)\
Evaluate form. Ignore top level check. 

(**$error** *form* *error-class*)\
Error check. Error class of form is error-class?

(**$error1** *form* *error-class*)\
Error check. Error class of form is error-class? Not ignore top-level check.
