README.md, before:

# Easy-ISLisp

Easy-ISLisp(EISL) is an interpreter and compiler compatible with the [ISLisp standard](https://minejima.jp/ISLispHyperDraft/islisp-v23.html).
EISL was written by Kenichi Sasagawa
https://qiita.com/sym_num/items/793adfe118514668e5b0

See [ISLisp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISLISP)
YouTube [introduction of Easy-ISLisp](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KfrRyKMcTw8&t=330s)

# Installation

Change to the git cloned or downloaded Easy-ISLisp directory.

- Type "git submodule init; git submodule update" (if you forget the makefile should do this automatically).
- In Linux  type "sudo make install".
- In macOS  type "sudo make install OPSYS=macos".
- In OpenBSD  type "sudo make install OPSYS=openbsd".
- You can also supply a "PREFIX=$HOME" (or wherever) argument if you want.

You may get an error that the curses.h file cannot be found when compiling Edlis. 
In this case, enter the following from the terminal

```sh
sudo apt install libncurses-dev
```

After version 1.4 Windows OS is not supported. Please use WSL on Windows.
see [Visual Studio Code Remote Development Extension Pack](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.vscode-remote-extensionpack)


We confirmed operation in the following environments.
- Ubuntu 16.04 GCC 5.4
- Ubuntu 18.04 GCC 7.3
- Raspberry Pi3 Raspbian GCC 6.3
- Raspberry Pi3 Raspbian GCC 8.3.0
- openSUSE Leap 42.3 GCC 4.8.5
- Debian GNU/Linux GCC 6.3 GCC 7.3
- Linux Mint GCC ver 5.4
- Linux Mint GCC ver9.3.0
- macOS 11.1 clang 12.0.0 
- OpenBSD

# Invoke

```sh
eisl 
```

In the Linux version,the REPL is editable. If you do not want to use the editable REPL, invoke with the -r option.

```sh
eisl -r
```

If you want to start after reading a file, use the -l command-line option.
e.g.

```sh
eisl -l foo.lsp 
```

For other options, see `eisl -h`:

```
$ eisl -h
List of options:
-c           -- EISL starts after reading compiler.lsp.
-f           -- EISL starts after reading formatter.lsp.
-h           -- display help.
-l filename  -- EISL starts after reading the file.
-r           -- EISL does not use editable REPL.
-s filename  -- EISL runs the file with script mode.
-v           -- dislplay version number.
```

# Quit

In the REPL type (quit) or Esc+Q.

In the non-editable REPL type (quit) or CTRL+D.

# Editable REPL

Key bindings are as follows:

| Key         | Description           |
| ----------- | --------------------- |
| ctrl+F or → | move right            |
| ctrl+B or ← | move left             |
| ctrl+P or ↑ | recall history older  |
| ctrl+N or ↓ | recall history newer  |
| ctrl+A      | move to begin of line |
| strl+E      | move to end of line   |
| ctrl+J ctrl+M or return | insert end of line             |
| ctrl+H or back-space    | backspace                      |
| ctrl+D                  | delete one char                |
| ctrl+K                  | kill line from current positon |
| ctrl+Y                  | yank killed line               |
| Esc Tab                 | completion                     |

# Goal

I hope that Lisp will become more popular.
I hope many people enjoy it.
EISL aims to be user-friendly.

# Compiler

EISL has a compiler.
It generates C code that can be compiled using gcc or clang to object code.

Invoke with the -c option,
`eisl -c`
or `(import "compiler")` in the REPL.
Then you can
```lisp
(compile-file "foo.lsp")
(load "foo.o")
```

For example:

```
eisl -c
Easy-ISLisp Ver1.6
> (compile-file "tests/tarai.lsp")
type inference
initialize
pass1
pass2
compiling PACK
compiling TARAI
compiling FIB
compiling FIB*
compiling ACK
compiling GFIB
compiling TAK
compiling LISTN
compiling TAKL
compiling CTAK
compiling CTAK-AUX

finalize
invoke GCC
T
> (load "tests/tarai.o")
T
> (time (tarai 12 6 0))
Elapsed Time(second)=0.024106
<undef>
> (time (ack 4 1))
Elapsed Time(second)=3.728262
<undef>
>
```

# Invoke editor

The `edit` function invokes the
[Edlis](https://github.com/sasagawa888/Edlis)
editor.

(edit file-name-string) example (edit "foo.lsp")

# WiringPi

On paspberry PI, Eisl includes system function of WiringPi. 

```lisp
EISL <==================================> C
(wiringpi-spi-setup ch speed) <===> wiringPiSPISetup (SPI_CH, SPI_SPEED)
(wiringpi-setup-gpio ) <===> wiringPiSetupGpio()
(pin-mode n 'output) <====> pinMode(n, OUTPUT) or 'input -> INPUT 'pwm-output -> PWM-OUTPUT
(digital-write n v) <===> digitalWrite(n, v)
(digital-write-byte v) <===> digitalWriteByte(value)
(digital-read pin) <===> digitalRead(pin)
(delay howlong) <===> void delay(unsigned int howLong)
(pull-up-dn-control pin pud) <===> pullUpDnControl(pin,pud)
(pwm-set-mode 'pwm-mode-ms) <===> pwmSetMode(PWM_MODE_MS); or 'pwm-mode-bal -> PWM_MODE_BAL
(pwm-set-clock n) <===> pwmSetClock(n)
(pwm-set-range n) <===> pwmSetRange(n)
(pwm-write pin value) <===> pwmWrite(pin , value)
```

### Examples.

```lisp
;;LED on/off

(defglobal pin 5)
(defglobal flag nil)

(defun test (n)
   (cond ((null flag) (wiringpi-setup-gpio)(setq flag t)))
   (pin-mode pin 'output)
   (for ((i 0 (+ i 1)))
        ((> i n) t)
        (digital-write pin 1)
        (delay 1000)
        (digital-write pin 0)
        (delay 1000)))


;;control servo moter.
;;SG90 Micro servo Digital 9g

(defun setup ()
  (cond ((null flag) (wiringpi-setup-gpio ) (setq flag t)))
  (pin-mode 18 'pwm-output)
  (pwm-set-mode 'pwm-mode-ms)
  (pwm-set-clock 400)
  (pwm-set-range 1024))

(defun test (n)
   (pwm-write 18 n))
```

# Functions for debug
- (trace fn1 fn2 ... fn)
- (untrace fn1 fn2 ... fn) or (untrace)
- (backtrace)
- (break)
- (macroexpand-1)

# Extended functions

| Function              | Description                              |
| --------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| (random n)            | random-integer from 0 to n               |
| (random-real)         | random-float-number from 0 to 1          |
| (gbc)                 | invoke garbage collection.               |
| (gbc t)               | display message when invoke GC.          |
| (gbc nil)             | not display message when invoke GC.      |
| (gbc 'copy)           | change GC method to copying-GC           | 
| (gbc 'm&s)            | change GC method to mark & sweep         |
| (heapdump n)          | display cell dump list from nth address  |
| (instance n)          | display instance of nth address          |
| (defmodule name body) | see tests/module.lsp                     |
| (import x)            | import library. e.g. (import "compiler") |

Commit message:

Follow some UNIX/scripting conventions:
* Allow installation anywhere on the filesystem, provided you set the
EASY_ISLISP environment variable

* Respect the VISUAL & EDITOR environment variables in the (edit ...)
function

* Allow shebang (#!) scripts

README.md, after:

# Easy-ISLisp

Easy-ISLisp(EISL) is an interpreter and compiler compatible with the [ISLisp standard](https://minejima.jp/ISLispHyperDraft/islisp-v23.html).
EISL was written by Kenichi Sasagawa
https://qiita.com/sym_num/items/793adfe118514668e5b0

See [ISLisp](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISLISP)
YouTube [introduction of Easy-ISLisp](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=KfrRyKMcTw8&t=330s)

# Installation

Change to the git cloned or downloaded Easy-ISLisp directory.

- Type "git submodule init; git submodule update" (if you forget the makefile should do this automatically).
- In Linux  type "sudo make install".
- In macOS  type "sudo make install OPSYS=macos".
- In OpenBSD  type "sudo make install OPSYS=openbsd".
- You can also supply a "PREFIX=$HOME" (or wherever) argument if you want.

You may get an error that the curses.h file cannot be found when compiling EISL & Edlis. 
In this case, enter the following from the terminal

```sh
sudo apt install libncurses-dev
```

After version 1.4 Windows OS is not supported. Please use WSL on Windows.
see [Visual Studio Code Remote Development Extension Pack](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-vscode-remote.vscode-remote-extensionpack)


We confirmed operation in the following environments.
- Ubuntu 16.04 GCC 5.4
- Ubuntu 18.04 GCC 7.3
- Raspberry Pi3 Raspbian GCC 6.3
- Raspberry Pi3 Raspbian GCC 8.3.0
- openSUSE Leap 42.3 GCC 4.8.5
- Debian GNU/Linux GCC 6.3 GCC 7.3
- Linux Mint GCC ver 5.4
- Linux Mint GCC ver9.3.0
- macOS 11.1 clang 12.0.0 
- OpenBSD

If you cloned the repo anyplace but *$HOME/eisl*,
you should set the `EASY_ISLISP` enviroment variable to point to it.

# Invoke

```sh
eisl 
```

In the Linux version,the REPL is editable. If you do not want to use the editable REPL, invoke with the -r option.

```sh
eisl -r
```

If you want to start after reading a file, use the -l command-line option.
e.g.

```sh
eisl -l foo.lsp 
```

For other options, see `eisl -h`:

```
$ eisl -h
List of options:
-c           -- EISL starts after reading compiler.lsp.
-f           -- EISL starts after reading formatter.lsp.
-h           -- display help.
-l filename  -- EISL starts after reading the file.
-r           -- EISL does not use editable REPL.
-s filename  -- EISL runs the file with script mode.
-v           -- dislplay version number.
```

You can also write ISLisp scripts,
following the usual UNIX convention of pointing to the interpreter with the first line, e.g.
```lisp
#!/Users/me/bin/eisl -s
(format (standard-output) "Hello world~%")
```

# Quit

In the REPL type (quit) or Esc+Q.

In the non-editable REPL type (quit) or CTRL+D.

# Editable REPL

Key bindings are as follows:

| Key         | Description           |
| ----------- | --------------------- |
| ctrl+F or → | move right            |
| ctrl+B or ← | move left             |
| ctrl+P or ↑ | recall history older  |
| ctrl+N or ↓ | recall history newer  |
| ctrl+A      | move to begin of line |
| strl+E      | move to end of line   |
| ctrl+J ctrl+M or return | insert end of line             |
| ctrl+H or back-space    | backspace                      |
| ctrl+D                  | delete one char                |
| ctrl+K                  | kill line from current positon |
| ctrl+Y                  | yank killed line               |
| Esc Tab                 | completion                     |

# Goal

I hope that Lisp will become more popular.
I hope many people enjoy it.
EISL aims to be user-friendly.

# Compiler

EISL has a compiler.
It generates C code that can be compiled using gcc or clang to object code.

Invoke with the -c option,
`eisl -c`
or `(import "compiler")` in the REPL.
Then you can
```lisp
(compile-file "foo.lsp")
(load "foo.o")
```

For example:

```
eisl -c
Easy-ISLisp Ver1.6
> (compile-file "tests/tarai.lsp")
type inference
initialize
pass1
pass2
compiling PACK
compiling TARAI
compiling FIB
compiling FIB*
compiling ACK
compiling GFIB
compiling TAK
compiling LISTN
compiling TAKL
compiling CTAK
compiling CTAK-AUX

finalize
invoke GCC
T
> (load "tests/tarai.o")
T
> (time (tarai 12 6 0))
Elapsed Time(second)=0.024106
<undef>
> (time (ack 4 1))
Elapsed Time(second)=3.728262
<undef>
>
```

# Invoke editor

By default the `edit` function invokes the
[Edlis](https://github.com/sasagawa888/Edlis)
editor.
But note that it respects the UNIX convention of the `VISUAL` and `EDITOR` environment variables, so if either of those is defined it will be used instead.

(edit file-name-string) example (edit "foo.lsp")

# WiringPi

On paspberry PI, Eisl includes system function of WiringPi. 

```lisp
EISL <==================================> C
(wiringpi-spi-setup ch speed) <===> wiringPiSPISetup (SPI_CH, SPI_SPEED)
(wiringpi-setup-gpio ) <===> wiringPiSetupGpio()
(pin-mode n 'output) <====> pinMode(n, OUTPUT) or 'input -> INPUT 'pwm-output -> PWM-OUTPUT
(digital-write n v) <===> digitalWrite(n, v)
(digital-write-byte v) <===> digitalWriteByte(value)
(digital-read pin) <===> digitalRead(pin)
(delay howlong) <===> void delay(unsigned int howLong)
(pull-up-dn-control pin pud) <===> pullUpDnControl(pin,pud)
(pwm-set-mode 'pwm-mode-ms) <===> pwmSetMode(PWM_MODE_MS); or 'pwm-mode-bal -> PWM_MODE_BAL
(pwm-set-clock n) <===> pwmSetClock(n)
(pwm-set-range n) <===> pwmSetRange(n)
(pwm-write pin value) <===> pwmWrite(pin , value)
```

### Examples.

```lisp
;;LED on/off

(defglobal pin 5)
(defglobal flag nil)

(defun test (n)
   (cond ((null flag) (wiringpi-setup-gpio)(setq flag t)))
   (pin-mode pin 'output)
   (for ((i 0 (+ i 1)))
        ((> i n) t)
        (digital-write pin 1)
        (delay 1000)
        (digital-write pin 0)
        (delay 1000)))


;;control servo moter.
;;SG90 Micro servo Digital 9g

(defun setup ()
  (cond ((null flag) (wiringpi-setup-gpio ) (setq flag t)))
  (pin-mode 18 'pwm-output)
  (pwm-set-mode 'pwm-mode-ms)
  (pwm-set-clock 400)
  (pwm-set-range 1024))

(defun test (n)
   (pwm-write 18 n))
```

# Functions for debug
- (trace fn1 fn2 ... fn)
- (untrace fn1 fn2 ... fn) or (untrace)
- (backtrace)
- (break)
- (macroexpand-1)

# Extended functions

| Function              | Description                              |
| --------------------- | ---------------------------------------- |
| (random n)            | random-integer from 0 to n               |
| (random-real)         | random-float-number from 0 to 1          |
| (gbc)                 | invoke garbage collection.               |
| (gbc t)               | display message when invoke GC.          |
| (gbc nil)             | not display message when invoke GC.      |
| (gbc 'copy)           | change GC method to copying-GC           | 
| (gbc 'm&s)            | change GC method to mark & sweep         |
| (heapdump n)          | display cell dump list from nth address  |
| (instance n)          | display instance of nth address          |
| (defmodule name body) | see tests/module.lsp                     |
| (import x)            | import library. e.g. (import "compiler") |
